I was seeing six blue whales in
an area the size of a soccer
pitch
I've got to name the unorthodox
wheels because they actually
break the stereotypes we had for
these species it is set me on an
incredible adventure was back in
$MONTH 2003 i was working in a
whale research vessel that was
circumnavigating the globe on
this particular day of
significance i was standing up
on deck
straining my eyes looking out
for this part of sperms that we
trap all night long I could hear
that sounds emanating from the
pilothouse below me but I just
couldn't see them
I knew what I was looking for
this shot lofty blue slide it
off to the left-hand side super
characteristic of sperm well I
searched and I looked for hours
and end and I couldn't find them
but then I saw this at all
powerful vertical blue that rose
all the way to the sky as far as
I could tell this animal is at
least two kilometers away from
us but it was an incredible
sight and I knew we could only
come from an animal it was
incredibly large and powerful so
I got super excited as you would
as well and I grabbed my
walkie-talkie to call down to my
captain I said Bob eleven
o'clock to columbus gogo and he
says why and I said I think it's
a blue will and he said sure
gets off course that's cruising
the direction that I have now
sent him off in and i am now
like so afraid and paranoid to
lose this visual my eyes are
streaming as i stand to the
glare
I'm trying so hard to just focus
and that's when I think I
started to lose my mind because
it wasn't just one blue li was
seeing I was seeing six blue
whales in an area the size of a
soccer pitch each animal is the
length of a soccer pitch
so to me it made absolutely no
sense
I'm thinking to myself why on
earth with an animal the largest
that is ever on the plant with
the freedom to cut like travel
seventy percent of our planet
choose to just aggregate in this
tiny little spot in a warm
tropical ocean so I was fresh
out of undergrad and I sad to
think about what I've been
taught that obama takes and what
my professors had said and I
remembered large rails like blue
wheels and take long-range
migrations between called
feeding areas and warm breeding
and carving areas that was it I
was super stoked I was going to
be the first person on the
planet to document blue whales
having six so I you know I
thought this is also my career's
made fame and fortune when
people complain about this is so
easy
gosh so I'm they're eating the
captain on them like Bob we have
to go this is going to be
incredible
so we're moving forward getting
their work moving as fast as
this but can take us and we get
there and is not what you think
it is
there's not a single whale penis
insight i am super disappointed
because these words are now
allowing at the surface hanging
out occasionally one will dive
come back up and I'm like what
the heck is going on my dreams
that I had created for the last
two kilometers of my life was
completely shattered
and I was like oh my god what am
I going to do with my life but I
insisted that we stay around and
watched a little because you
know this is my first google or
six and that's when I saw this
this ladies and gentlemen is a
pile of blue whale poop
what's most exciting about this
is not just the stunning red
color but the fact that there
was pool which meant these
animals were feeding somewhere
close
now remember what I told you the
start blue whales and take
long-range migrations between
cold feeding areas and warm
breeding and carving areas
solanke is five degrees above
the crater as warm as tropical
as it can get
what the hick
how the hell were they feeding
in these waters they considered
unproductive because they're
warm
this was my Eureka moment
not everyone can say that their
career started with the pilot
but I'm pretty pleased to be
able to do that
the thing is this moment
spiraled into me pioneering blue
whale research in the northern
Indian Ocean i launched the
first long-term study on this
population of pretty much
unknown blue wheels crazy but
true and it has set me on an
incredible adventure in the
intervening years i have
discovered that in fact these
waters because of the enclosed
nature of the northern Indian
Ocean the situation of sri lanka
southern cost is extremely
productive for that latitude
I've gone to name the unorthodox
wheels because they actually
break the stereotypes we had for
these species they don't
undertake long-range migrations
they actually have a very
limited range they hang out all
year round in warm tropical
waters of the northern Indian
Ocean there's the smallest of
the blue whales that you find in
the oceans they're called pygmy
blue whales they go to 80 feet
not a hundred they have a
different acoustic dialect they
also have different behaviors
they lift their tail flukes up
before a deep dive more often
than anywhere else in the world
so you'll see this about sixty
percent of the time as anywhere
else less than twenty percent of
the time it's a photographer's
dream destination blue is
everywhere in the world that
cost jennifer is because they're
very specifically feed on one
single thing krill these guys
feed on shrimp little different
but the key thing here is that
they have all these different
behaviors and adaptations
because they're living in a very
confined space / very limited
range and during the course of
my work I've also met the oldest
blue will in our population i
took this photograph in 2011 on
a documentary shoot and as soon
as I saw the markings i thought
to myself i have seen you before
luckily not a lot of work had
gone on before on these wheels
in fact there's only one paper
that existed in the history of
our nation and that was done in
1984 and you can see and I've
named it well and time but the
point is this animals at least
27 years old and it's living in
our waters but what's really
cool about this sighting is that
you can see where i saw the
whaling 2011 was just less than
10 kilometers away from where it
was cited in 1984 so we're
getting a sense of sight
fidelity how important this area
is to these animals we know that
feeding breeding and carving in
a very confined space so the
conservation problems they face
are far more compounded right
now my crusade is about saving
these rails from getting killed
by ships the southern coast of
sri lanka is one of the busiest
shipping lanes in the world it's
the main artery through the
Indian Ocean everything from
Singapore to Dubai cruise right
through these waters
here's some of the data we have
the red lines showing you this
dance ship traffic the black
dots
those are whale sightings look
at the South course there is a
distinct overlap so sightings
like this i totally unsurprising
this is a whale that came
wrapped on the ballot
containership into the main port
in sri lanka in colombo in 2012
12 days later we had another
carcass floating at sea with a
massive propeller gash the thing
is evidence like this can be a
little bit red because
oftentimes the carcasses will
sink get pushed off shore are
they deteriorate so much that
when they come onto Shore we can
actually identify the cause of
death but calculations show that
for everyone we document at
least ten have gone undocumented
so it's not an isolated incident
neither the numbers fall ninety
percent of the vessels that
cruise through our waters are
actually bypassing my country
they're not coming into port so
if we can shift the shipping
lanes 15 nautical miles offshore
we can reduce the problems
significantly and then that ten
percent of the vessels that are
actually coming into port
well if they slow down a little
it would make a difference
I've done the science I've
created all the awareness and
now i'm pushing for policy
change both at the level of sri
lankan government
but also inter-governmental
because shipping lanes are
slightly complex problem but my
work is not just about saving
wheels my work is about showing
the talent of the developing
world
I believe that we get local
scientist trained so they can
start looking after their own
waters using local solutions
that is what creates
sustainability and i invite all
of you to join me on this
audacious audacious journey to
achieve this for the sake of the
oceans and humanity
thank you
you'll come in you'll see the
the whale rotates as it
approaches the bottom it's
rolling on its side and the
camera twists actually so it's
pointed downwards and you see
these little sand lance fish
swarming all over the bottom
that's the pray that the whales
going after